PopMedNet: A scalable and extensible open-source
informatics platform designed to facilitate the
implementation and operation of distributed health data
networks
Daniel Dee1 , Dean Corriveau1 , Jeffrey R. Ladd1 , Lakshmi
Nannapaneni1 , John Arkins1 , and Jeffrey Brown2
1 General Dynamics Information Technology 2 Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute
DOI: 10.21105/joss.04062
Software
• Review
• Repository
• Archive

Editor: Daniel S. Katz
Reviewers:
• @jhancock4d
• @lrasmus
Submitted: 22 October 2021
Published: 04 March 2022

Summary
PopMedNet™ is an open-source application used to facilitate multi-site health data networks
(Brown et al., 2010). It uses a distributed network design that enables data partners to retain
full control of their data. Investigators send questions to data partners for review and response.
PopMedNet eliminates the need for assembling patient records in a centralized repository, thus
preserving patient privacy and confidentiality.
Its development was pioneered by the Therapeutics Research and Infectious Disease Epidemiology (TIDE) group of the Department of Population Medicine (DPM) of the Harvard Pilgrim
Health Care Institute (HPHCI), an appointing department of the Harvard Medical School.

License
Authors of papers retain
copyright and release the work
under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International
License (CC BY 4.0).

Figure 1: PopMedNet.

Dee et al. (2022). PopMedNet: A scalable and extensible open-source informatics platform designed to facilitate the implementation and 1
operation of distributed health data networks. Journal of Open Source Software, 7 (71), 4062. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.04062.

Statement of need
Distributed health network plays an important role in supporting a number of population health
activities (Brown et al., 2010).
The goal of PopMedNet™ is to facilitate distributed analysis of electronic health data in order
to support medical product safety surveillance, disease surveilance, comparative effectiveness,
quality, medical resource use, cost-effectiveness, and related studies. It does this by enabling
the creation of health data networks that allows the data owners to keep and control uses of
their data, while at the same time allows customized access and governance for each network
(Davies et al., 2016; Malenfant et al., 2015).
The concerns of the network stakeholders are addressed in the design and governance models
of the PopMedNet™ software platform.
PopMedNet™ features include distributed querying, customizable workflows, and auditing and
search capabilities. Its flexible role-based access control system enables the enforcement of
varying governance policies.

Architecture
PopMedNet™ has two components. It has a .NET web application component (Portal) and
a Windows desktop application component (DataMart Client). The .NET web component
uses a modern service oriented architecture (SOA) with a robust API serving a dynamic UI
using the MVVM pattern. The DataMart Client (DMC), uses a plugin architecture to support
different types of adapters for querying data. A variety of adapters are available, and able to
support file transfer, ad-hoc SQL queries, and dynamically composed queries against local data
sources (including SQL Server, Postgres and Oracle).
PopMedNet™ is a .NET Framework application, utilizing ASP.NET MVC5 for the implementation of the website application and WinForms for the desktop application. Entity Framework
6 is used for data access, and Typescript for client-side scripting.

How does PopMedNet™ work?
In PopMedNet™, the Portal handles all the governance and acts as a hub for all queries. That
ensures that the coordinating center can expect:
• Consistency of information across data partners
• Quality of data
• Flexibility to handle different network structures with overlapping data partners
• Ability to track and report operational activities
• Managing multiple projects
The DMC allows data partners to control access to their data before sending it to the Portal.
For the data partners, it will:
• Provide protection of Protected Health Information (PHI is defined as any personal
health information that can potentially identify an individual)
• Prevent loss of control over proprietary information
The researcher will have no direct access to data but is shielded from the differences among
networks’ data models.
A typical PopMedNet™ request-response cycle is as follows:
1. Request: Investigators distribute data requests constructed in the point and click web
interface
Dee et al. (2022). PopMedNet: A scalable and extensible open-source informatics platform designed to facilitate the implementation and 2
operation of distributed health data networks. Journal of Open Source Software, 7 (71), 4062. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.04062.

2. Review: Data Partners receive and review requests in their DataMart Client
3. Respond: Data partners execute the requests against their local data and upload results
4. Download: Investigators access results in the query tool

Figure 2: PopMedNet Workflow.

Comparison to i2b2 and SHRINE
i2b2 (Informatics for Integrating Biology & the Bedside) is a flexible query tool in use in
many US hospitals. Each i2b2 instance comprises a collection of cells called a “hive”. This
architecture supports extensibility via add-ons through additional cells.
SHRINE (Shared Health Research Informatis NEtwork) is an i2b2 extension for supporting
distributed queries. Each SHRINE instance consists of two hives, the client and the server.
SHRINE instances communicate through the SPIN federated query language (McMurry et al.,
2013).
Architecturally, PopMedNet™ uses a more tightly coupled hub-and-spoke distribution strategy
while SHRINE uses a more loosely coupled, mesh strategy. While SHRINE requires immediate
query response from the data sources in a single session, PopMedNet™ allows request-responses
to be conducted over multiple sessions. From a user-interface perspective, i2b2/SHRINE uses
a drag-and-drop model, while PopMedNet™ uses a menu-driven model.
A SHRINE-PopMedNet™ was prototyped to give SHRINE queries the ability to span sessions
and conversely to give PopMedNet™ the ability to participate in a SHRINE network.

Acknowledgements
PopMedNet™ (“PopMedNet,” n.d.) was developed and has been extended as part of several
contracts awarded by a range of federal, state, and industry stakeholders:
• FDA’s Sentinel Initiative
• PCORI’s National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORnet)
In addition, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute serves as the coordinating center for several
other initiatives that use PMN and its associated software ecosystem including:
Dee et al. (2022). PopMedNet: A scalable and extensible open-source informatics platform designed to facilitate the implementation and 3
operation of distributed health data networks. Journal of Open Source Software, 7 (71), 4062. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.04062.

• Biologics and Biosimilars Collective Intelligence Consortium (BBCIC)
• Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) & Food and Drug
Administration
• Privacy-protecting distributed analysis of biomedical big data project funded by the
National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes
of Health

References
Brown, J., Holmes, H., J., Shah, K., Hall, K., Lazarus, R., & Platt, R. (2010). Distributed
health data networks: A practical and preferred approach to multi-institutional evaluations
of comparative effectiveness, safety, and quality of care. Medical Care, 48. https://doi.
org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181d9919f
Davies, M., Erickson, K., Wyner, Z., Malenfant, J. M., Rosen, R., & Brown, J. (2016). Softwareenabled distributed network governance: The PopMedNet experience. The Journal of
Electronic Health Data and Methods. https://doi.org/10.13063/2327-9214.1213
Malenfant, J., Davies, M., Swan, B., & Brown, J. S. (2015). PopMedNet: Collecting and
using metadata in distributed research networks. Journal of Patient-Centered Research
and Reviews. https://doi.org/10.17294/2330-0698.1149
McMurry, A. J., Murphy, S. N., MacFadden, D., Griffin, W., Simons, W. W., Orcechia,
J., Bickel, J., Wattanasin, N., Gilbert, C., Trevvett, P., Churchill, S., & Kohane, I. S.
(2013). SHRINE: Enabling nationally scalable multi-site disease studies. PLOS ONE.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0055811
PopMedNet. (n.d.). In PopMedNet. Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute. https://www.
popmednet.org/

Dee et al. (2022). PopMedNet: A scalable and extensible open-source informatics platform designed to facilitate the implementation and 4
operation of distributed health data networks. Journal of Open Source Software, 7 (71), 4062. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.04062.

